.. _foundations:

Foundations
============

Intro to foundations
--------------------

This section focuses on the philosophical foundations of OpenGeo - our core beliefs, where we start from.  One can easily skip this, and for many this won't have much new information.  But it should reveal our biases in how we operate in the world, and it provides a basis for the way we make decisions about what to do and not do.  We don't believe in imposing these core values on others, we are not zealous about these beliefs.  But they are at the core of what we do, and we'll naturally work better with those who share the values.  And we do believe they point to the type of future we want to live in.  


Collaboration
--------------

We believe in collaborating with others as much as possible.  This means many different things, from always focusing on community-based open source software, to building partner networks, to using and contributing to open standards, to connecting with proprietary software.  We believe that true collaboration towards a real goal is more important than sticking dogmatically to a set of principles.  Our way of approaching the world is to seek to align incentives of various individuals and institutions as much as possible, so all can achieve their own ends while simultaneously working towards something bigger.  

This is always a challenge, and indeed we are not seeking collaboration for collaboration's sake.  Working with others can be a lot of fun, but if it's not building towards something than it's not worth it.  There are countless opportunities to collaborate every day, and it can take up a lot of time.  So we seek to always be open to collaboration, but have it start small, and constantly evaluate if that collaboration is building more than each participant could alone.  

Collaboration is often contrasted against competition, but we don't view them at odds with one another.  We appreciate the amazing feedback mechanism of 'the market', and the competition there ensures what we are doing is worthwhile.  But we believe collaborating in order to compete.  The line between collaboration and competition is quite fluid, and indeed competition to us is more like a friendly soccer game, less like a battle or war.  We'll compete with all our hearts in the moment, and do everything to win, but go and grab a beer with the opposing team after the match.  Or we'll switch up team members to make it a better game.  The goal is to get each individual working at their maximum potential, and competition can be quite useful for that.  But the ultimate goal is to build something positive in the world, to cooperate on the macro level. [#f1]_  Competition just helps ensure that more resources go to the better collaborations.  Competition is incredibly useful, it pushes humans to more.  The `Space Race <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Space_Race/>`_ is a great example of this type of competition.  So we do welcome competition, but always keep in mind the greater collaborative goals.  And are always happy to collaborate with anyone who is or will be a competitor, as long as we can find a way for some incentives to align properly.  

As the internet enables far more collaboration than has been previously possible we believe that the winners of competition will be those who collaborate the best.  Smaller, more agile organizations and even just collections of interested people are already outperforming huge corporations in a variety of ways.  We embrace this new networked reality, and hope to contribute to finding innovative structures that enable even more effective cooperation.

Transparency
------------

Hand in hand with collaboration is our belief in transparency.  Though we do have to limit our collaborations, since time is finite, we try to make all of our actions, ideas and decisions as open as possible.  This way anyone can position themselves for future collaboration, since all information about our direction is open.  The core reason we can do this is we believe that 'ideas are cheap' - that the real value is in the ability to execute.  And if someone else can execute better than we can then we want to collaborate with them.  We have experienced many real advantages in being as transparent as possible, and very few real downsides.  We are practical about it, but a pragmatism of questioning why so many companies default things to 'closed' has lead to some real advantages to being transparent.  

 * We strive to always make our work available to all - open source licenses for code, open bug trackers and development lists, creative commons for workshops and documentation, recordings of workshops and talks available online, etc.  This enables anyone to instantly track the work we're doing every day.

 * Our pricing is listed directly on our website.  We don't believe in making people call where a salesperson can tweak the price on the fly to make the most money off of them.  This helps people trust us, and know that we're not looking to fleece them.

 * As a 501c3 our tax filing every year is open to all.  In the future we hope to get even better about being open about our costs.

 * The team and priorities lists where we coordinate what everyone is working on are public, so anyone can see in a given week what we are up to.

 * We never hide our strategic directions, our always open about what we're working on now and hope to work on next.  Periodically we work on roadmaps that we publish online, though these unfortunately often fall out of date.  But we never hide what we know we'll be working on, or what we want to work on.

 * We never require a Non-Disclosure Agreement for any thing we do, and we even try to avoid signing them when others ask.  Our goal is to at least get people to question if they really need it, and if there are good reasons we will sign them. [#fnda]

We would like to be even better, to not just have a firehose of information, but nice dashboards where anyone can easily track all that we're doing.  And do more summaries on the blog and newsletter of decisions we take.  And continually update our roadmap as it evolves in our minds.  We're working towards that, but also need to keep moving, so the best we can do in the short term is make all the raw information open.


Opening up ideas and direction enables us to get more input, to test our hunches early and often.  Opening up our source code lets far more people help us improve it and fix it, before we even do a real release.  Opening our pricing structures and costs lets people feel good about where their money is going and lets them trust us more.  

We don't ever require Non-disclosure agreements, and indeed we try to avoid signing them if at all possible.  

We believe in being as transparent as possible.  no secret biz plans, etc.  Sometimes this is lazy (open lists aren't that useful), but we prefer the firehouse to never putting something out.  

Our software is made to help transparency, but by making the best product, not pushing it on people.  But building transparent and open in to it.  Which can of course be turned off, but transparent when ready.

Believe it needs to be part of the natural process, that people are lazy, that it can't be legislated.  So we want our tools used, and to have them always show the benefits of transparency - 'the win', of what wasn't possible before.  Not transparency for its own sake, but for what it enables, which it needs to prove each time.  



Open Source
-----------

OpenGeo's primary mode of achieving its goals is to produce community-based Open Source software.  We believe that the work we produce should be available to all, especially when it costs us nothing to create additional copies.  Software is a `non-rival <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rivalry_%28economics%29non-rival>`_, which means that providing an extra copy of GeoServer does not mean taking one away from someone else.  It can be copied infinitely, and so we feel that we shouldn't artificially prevent that copying.  We believe our work should be used by the maximum number of people, so we make as much as possible available as Open Source.

Of course the challenge is how to support developers to be able to afford to work on the software.  OpenGeo is an organizationally structure that tries to make that possible.  We currently make all the software that we work on as Open Source.  But we have talked about making some very small pieces only available as closed source.  Our strong preference is to not have to do that, and if we ever do we will definitely only keep it closed for a set amount of time.  The ideal is that all organizations who get value from our software contribute to funding core development, according to their ability.  But we are seeking to find a way to support 15 - 25 full time developers, and so are experimenting with alternate models.  Some of those may involve keeping some parts of the software closed, but we are more interested in models where all the 'intellectual property' is available to all.  

Another core tenant of our open source philosophy is to base it in a community as much as possible.  This means we never want to be the only contributor to a project we work on.  Indeed our preference would be to always just be one player in a collection of interested organizations and individuals.  So we always prefer the projects we work on and support to be shepherded by organizations like Apache and OSGeo who are committed to the same ideals.  This is quite different from a majority of the companies that are built around open source business models - they tend to hire up all the core developers, and the community adds lots of value around the edges.  Since our first goal is the sustenance of the software it makes the most sense for us to set up a structure so that even if OpenGeo didn't exist then the software could continue.  With a company their first concern of a company must be to make money, so to move faster they will hire up everyone who is good to further their aim.  Even at the potential expense of a thriving ecosystem which could lead to better software.  

Though we ourselves try to do as much open source as possible we are very pragmatic about it.  We don't actively try to convince others to open source their work, but we strive to show that its process of collaboration builds better software.  We aren't zealous in our application of it, indeed we put substantial work in to making our software work with an on proprietary platforms.  The stack we work on can easily be used in conjunction with proprietary systems, and we willingly put the work in to make it possible.  In the real world there are countless legacy systems, and it is rare to be able to do a complete migration all at once.  So we always try to collaborate with proprietary software, we just try to make our software open as much as possible.  


Open Standards
--------------   

Whenever possible OpenGeo truly uses open standards.  This to us is not just 'implementing' in order to check a box.  We truly believe in the diverse ecosystem of technology that open standards enable.  This enables people use our work in conjunction with others, and indeed opens the door to more innovative components that may not be open source.  Any component of ours could be swapped out for another, as open standards are the way we have the communicate internally.

Whenever one component of our technology has to interact with another we first try to see if we can directly use an open standard.  If it's not quite right then we try to make a compatible improvement, which we can hopefully get incorporated in to the standard.  If there is nothing available then we try to leverage all the best principles, for example using patterns like REST, which isn't a standard per se, but makes it easy for other systems to implement.  If we ever require a binary protocol we fully document what it is so others can implement (more than just the source code, which naturally provides some minimal documentation).  

There is a range of 'openness' to standards, but our preference is for ones that are free of license fees, publicly available, developed through a publicly visible, community process, and affirmed and maintained by a vendor-independent standards organization.  The WC3 specs are great.  In the geo world the Open Geospatial Consortium meets most of these requirements, and eventually we hope to help improve how they do things.   There have also been a number of nice open source centered standards, and perhaps OSGeo could play a more active role in standard development.  Once OpenGeo is generating enough revenue to contribute to other efforts we hope to help improve the development of geospatial standards. [#f2]


Open Data
---------

One of OpenGeo's primary goals is to help open more geospatial data, and to also lower the barrier to entry for creation of new geospatial information.  We believe that as much data as possible should be open.  Every organization, both public and private, should make their data available in open formats that others can analyze and use.  The problems of our world are ever increasing, and the only way to solve them is to give everyone a chance to tackle them.  To leverage new networks to come up with novel solutions, not just looking to traditional experts.  As Linus Torvald said, 'with enough eyeballs all bugs are shallow'.  We believe this extends to all the problems of the world - global warming, government corruption, poverty, disaster reduction, water management, property rights, and on and on.  Obviously open data is only going to be a small part of real solutions to these problems, but having the information open will help more people spot 'bugs' - small things that are actually wrong and easily correctable.  

Our method of working towards open data is not to enforce our beliefs on anyone.  We just make the best software possible, that has default of openness built in to it.  These defaults can always be turned off, as we understand that many just are not ready for full openness.  But we want it so when they are ready it's a flip of the switch of their existing system, instead of a big debate of whether it's worth the money.  But the decision to use our software will be made because it's the best tool for the job, not because it's open or not.  People may pick it because it's awesome google earth support, or that it's flexible enough to be integrated in another system that want to add maps.  But it automatically shares all configured data not just as maps, but also in raw data formats like GML, Shapefile, GeoJSON and GeoRSS.  We include very granular security options, so that the same system can be used for the pieces that can not be open.  This lowers the friction of data going from closed to open, as the tools for each can be the same.

We seek to embed our open solutions in to real work.  A worry we have about many of the latest open government efforts is that they are just 'trendy'.  They are afterthoughts to the actual process of creating data, and it's not embedded in the workflows of real workers.  So our focus in open data is on enabling real collaboration, giving people a 'win' for opening their data, not just opening data because it's the popular thing to do and the politicians can get some press releases out of it.  By making use of the same system for public open data efforts and internal collaboration we help ensure that data stays open even if the latest political trend moves on to something else.  

Collaborative Data
------------------

Beyond just opening existing data we seek to help true collaboration around data.  In his book, The Success of Open Source Software, Stephen Weber points out that the essence of open source has potential far beyond just software.  Developers just happened to be the closest to the Internet, the key innovation which made Open Source possible.  At the core of open source is a blurring of lines between producers and consumers, making it possible for anyone to move from a mere user to a primary decision maker in the software.  In the open data movement we've primarily seen existing data sets being opened, with much less emphasis on building the proper collaborative environments.  As Open Source software got popular everyone quickly learned that it wasn't a cure all, you couldn't just open your software and have a community of people show up and carry it forward.  Open Data enthusiasts trumpet benefits in a way similar to the early days of open source software, but in the next phase of the movement we're going to have to figure out how real collaboration around data can work.  For us that means aligning the incentives of those producing and consuming data, and building openness in to workflows. [#f3]

OpenGeo seeks to further collaborative geospatial data, to push beyond just opening data, and encourage the creation and maintenance of data sets on a scale that hasn't been possible before.  Geospatial information is definitely at the forefront of collaborative data, with OpenStreetMap and Ushahidi.  Our angle is to build modular tools that enable geospatial collaboration, and support a wide variety of projects that have different communities and technology needs.  We believe geospatial collaboration will end up more like open source than wikipedia.  Which is to say there will be a lot of different communities, with different norms, licenses, technologies and degrees of openness.  The type of collaboration around butterfly parks will be much different from that around emergency roads.  We believe that much of the innovation will be around governance - how you align the incentives of different groups so that they can collaborate.  And how data can flow between some groups with different norms - they may not work together directly but will always be able to overlay and pull data in.  Our focus is on modular tools that can help encourage this innovation, by making a base line set of great tools that can be tweaked and added to.  The proper architectures of participation around geospatial information are a blend of social and technical, and our goal is to advance the technical.  To do so we seek to work with many different collaborative data projects, from amateur and totally bottom up, to internal government ones, to commercial companies.

Our goal is true collaboration, an ecosystem where citizens, government, and companies all collaborate on a public infrastructure of geospatial information, reducing replication in data collection as much as possible.  We focus on geospatial, but we hope that advances we assist in can be applied to all types of data, getting in to legal norms and generic technology.  But we feel it is essential to not just stop with 'open', but push in to collaboration and participation.  Open is not an end in itself, and we seek to help bring about the real advantages of open data that are possible once collaboration around it becomes real.

Beyond money
-----------------------

OpenGeo makes money by competing in the market.  But we never seek the types of returns that would make real investors happy.  The market is essential for giving us feedback on what we are doing, and we believe in finding profitable niches in order to help make the market as a whole more efficient, while also supporting our operations.  But our commitment to our values is greater than our desire to making large amounts of profits, which means the innovations we use to reach that a profitable niche will be open to all.  And thus quite easy for anyone else to replicate - when they can use our source code, read our business strategy and research how we executed it's not hard to follow.  Instead of holding on to our niche for as long as we can instead we will find the next one and pass it off to our partners.  Our partners will be able to ride it longer and likely extract much more than we would, while being able to leverage our brand and core experts.  We'll just have a small percentage of the profits go to us, for the work we actively do and for the brand and we've built.  

Our first goal is to further our mission of open geospatial information, and better tools to make that possible - it's simply not be super profitable.  Sustainability is quite important to further that mission, so we do aim for profits.  But once we make them we'll seek to reinvest to further our mission, and also pursue things that are less likely to make profit (geospatial collaboration to help alleviate poverty instead of to help oil companies find new wells).  Indeed as a 501c3 we are obligated by law to reinvest any revenue made on the market back in to our mission - we simply can't write big checks to our initial funders.  

We believe this focus on creating meaning and doing good in the world instead of making the maximum amount of money possible is a distinct advantage of OpenGeo.  The best people in any profession do what they do because they love it, not because it will make them rich.  Those who are in it to maximize money probably do have something they _really_ want to do, and at some point will give themselves over to that entirely.  We seek to short cut that step of working really hard for something one doesn't care about, and align what people truly want to do with what OpenGeo does.  We've found this lets us get much better 'talent', as in this day and age more and more people are disillusioned with large corporations, and realizing that life is much more about finding meaning in day to day work, not in maximizing money and _then_ doing what one really wants.  The future directions of OpenGeo will be determined by where the individuals that make it want to grow personally, and we will limit the size so that's always possible.  And encourage people to spin out on their own to create their own OpenGeo, that partners closely but where they get more control over the exact direction.  

Location-based advertising
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This lack of emphasis on making big money means that we are simply not interested in location-based marketing and advertising.  While it is clearly 'the future', and while our tools are often used by startups and others aiming in that direction, it is just not a direction we will likely ever pursue.  Everyone at OpenGeo wants to do something that makes the world a better place, in some way.  Giving people coupons and ads based on their location is just not that interesting.  Helping build community, enabling people to analyze and contribute to location specific problems, and connecting people with one another through location are all things that many location-based companies will enable through massive growth powered by advertising.  We just prefer to work on the core platform or directly on the problems.  We hope to help build an open location infrastructure of which advertising is part of the fabric, but that fabric is about much more than selling and buying.  


Goals
-----


OpenGeo's goal is to build open software that helps share and understand geospatial information.  We believe that doing so will help build a truly open geospatial web of information - infrastructure for a new layer of transparency.  Our The ultimate goal is to help everyone be able to find and use any information that has a spatial component.  Location makes the increasing overload of information more relevant - it is one of the most useful filters available.  We share the visions of augmented reality, ambient findability and human connection through geospatial technology.  But we want to ensure that it's built on a public, open infrastructure - not dominated by any single point of control, just like the world wide web.   To do this we seek to align the incentives of governments, ngos, citizens, companies and consumers in to real geospatial collaboration on the base information.  

Our particular focus has been on helping governments open the information they have, and our next step is to hone in on data collaboration.  Helping governments gather and maintain geospatial data more efficiently, and helping non governmental groups do the same.  We are particularly interested in the intersection between the two, how governments can collaborate with companies and individuals around common geospatial information, reducing the replication in gathering it.  So we're working towards helping governments be able to leverage crowdsourcing in an effective way that lets them lower costs while still validating and meeting their public requirements.  

Our dream is to play a small role in enabling true collaboration, to bring the amazing power of open source to not just geospatial information, but to how we govern ourselves.  To help move from a society where 'the government' is something remote and abstract, to a way where we all collaborate to make our lives better.  At the core of this is a belief in openness, helping personal transformation to a state where everyone doesn't look to cover their asses, but we are open about our faults and where we need help, and from there we can all start to work together.  

Focus
-----

We limit ourselves in our goals - to geospatial, and to building software.  We limit so we can achieve more in a narrow domain, to have success in a niche.  Geospatial is a great place to be, as it cross cuts most every domain, and offers real value as a visualization of raw data.  We focus on software because we started as a software developers.  And it has a wonderful quality of being able to give all our work away without it costing us any additional time or effort, so we can have a much broader impact.  Focusing on infrastructure and tools allows others to innovate on top and take it in additional directions.  We do however always seek to involve ourselves in projects that directly touch users, citizens and consumers, so that we are always grounded in reality, not just building tools and infrastructure for our imagination.  In time we hope to have more directly user facing applications that we make ourselves, and that becomes more and more likely as the core tools are ever more mature.  But we will continue to focus our efforts, and likely spin off different OpenGeo type organizations that can make a similar impact.  But we seek to keep OpenGeo itself always focused on software and core geospatial software.  

A model
-------

Another goal of OpenGeo is to experiment with organizational structures.  We believe that modern corporations are not ideally suited for open source and indeed the larger trend of collaboration in this networked reality.  And neither are non-profits as they exist now.  Social Enterprise is slouching towards the right idea, but it encompasses so many different kinds of structures as to be almost meaningless.  There are some great initiatives working in similar directions, like Mozilla's Corporation/Foundation structure, and B-corps.  We hope to be part of what we believe to be a greater trend in working towards new, more appropriate structures.  We are driven by a mission, not by money, but we actively _want_ to compete in the market.  We desire to do things more efficiently, but with the goal of a better society, not more money for those who started it.  We are working towards a self sustainability where we can hopefully throw off enough money to incubate more organizations that are similar to OpenGeo.  The best of these will be grown to strong, independent self-sustaining nodes in our network, and hopefully each innovates with market and mission in different ways.  Hopefully we can find a structure that is at least more appropriate towards making open source software, where investments can be made by venture philanthropists to create self-sustaining software producers that help make a better world.  

Limits and Networks
-------------------

We put limits on the growth of OpenGeo, for two reasons.  The first is to open wider possibilities and opportunities for others - creating a network of opportunity instead of a single organization dominating.  The second is selfish - working for a 50 person company is a lot more fun than a 500 person company.  

Limiting ourselves to Geospatial Software certainly puts some constraint on our growth, but there are companies that just do geospatial and have thousands of employees.  Though we compete with these in the market we plan to compete more by building a flexible, agile network of allies.  We don't want our allies and partners to be threatened by us potentially jumping in to a profitable niche that they find.  Instead we want to be able to support and encourage them, to further innovation.  Some of these allies may be incubated by OpenGeo, but spun off as their own independent entity.  At some point we may split OpenGeo along some logical lines so that each unit can have more control and autonomy.  This should allow each organization to take bigger chances than they would as a division of a larger company.  Different organizations may form strong partnerships and symbiotic relationships with one another.  But an important point of keeping them separate is that they are allowed to die.  Each must compete in the market and get market feedback, instead of being a big corporate division that continues to exist and become more bureaucratic with inertia.  A vein of successful business ideas will lead to several 30-50 person organizations that form amoeba like, each breaking off from the core when it can support itself.  Some of these may be very co-dependent, like breaking out a killer design or marketing team in to its own company, specializing in geospatial user experience.  Their primary client would still be OpenGeo, but others in the market would also be able to use their services.  This in some ways is extending good, modular open source software design to the world of business - each unit should be able to be used by others.  

More likely in the short term than breaking out a team would be a partner of OpenGeo focusing on a particular domain and finding great success.  This could be as an awesome services business, that builds amazing applications for lots of clients, based on OpenGeo software.  Or it could be a new product that leverages the OpenGeo Suite for a particular niche - cloud-based biological tracking, or a mobile geo-enabled emergency response system.  Instead of trying to build a company that grows and expands to more niches those niches should be covered by other nodes in the network that can truly understand the market.  But they'll benefit from improvements to the geo core, and will also contribute back to it.  

The selfish reason for these limits is that most everyone that we talked to about building and growing companies says the most fun stage is when it's small.  When you know everyone and have a common mission you're working towards, where everyone is synced up.  We want to continue to work for those companies, and don't want to have to leave and start new things.  Some of these may be more profit oriented than OpenGeo, some may be less.  So if we just split thing up along logical lines whenever it gets too big then we can continue on this path.  We hope that we can continue the synergies of working together even if in separate organizations, and indeed open source software provides a model for this.  

* Being able to find everything
* Having power to influence
* Facilitate collaboration
* Personal transformation
* Why Spatial

  * cross cuts everything
  * visual
  * constrain the problem

.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#f1] A good example of this is the rivalry between GeoServer and MapServer.  Both are collaboratively built, but compete in the annual 'WMS Shoot Out' at the FOSS4G conference, where we see which is faster.  The competition is fierce, both teams want to win, but ultimately everyone is friends.  Each project meets all the same open standards, so they naturally cooperate far more than they 'compete'.  Both talk to the same backend and front end software, and contribute to each of those.  Both groups will recommend the other when it's more appropriate for a situation.  The awesome result of this competition, however, is that both projects are far faster than any of the rest of the competition.  For the past couple years proprietary software has tried to compete in the competition, but dropped out early because they couldn't devote enough resources to it.  Our suspicion is that they were so far behind that it would be bad marketing for them to admit it.  (Our favorite in 2010 was QGIS Mapserver, which had an abysmal showing relative to others, but still published their numbers - that's opening the door for collaboration).  In general the competition between GeoServer and MapServer has made both projects far stronger than they'd be if they existed in isolation.  

.. [#f2] Our current preference is best typified by the GeoRSS standard, which was started as a completely open community process.  When it had sufficiently matured the OGC took it under its wing and made it an official standard, without trying to change it.  In our view the current standard OGC spec development process could use a couple improvements, like having decisions made online and not in person, and opening the spec development to anyone interested, not just paying members.  

.. [#f3] Nat Torkington has a really great post that articulates this type of thinking quite well, see http://radar.oreilly.com/2010/02/rethinking-open-data.html

.. [#fnda] (nda thoughts)
